[GEP-26] Workload Identity - Trust Based Authentication (#9260)
gardener/gardener: docs/proposals/26-workload-identity.md

  - [Kubernetes Service Account Tokens From Seed Cluster](#kubernetes-service-account-tokens-from-seed-cluster)

## Summary

Gardener issues and distributes JSON Web Tokens that can be used for
authentication with external services. Gardener also exposes metadata documents
in an OIDC compatible way, if needed, in the public internet. This allows
Gardener users to establish trust towards Gardener through their service
providers leveraging identity federation and parts of the OIDC protocol. By
employing the JWTs and the trust federation, static credentials are no longer
needed for authentication with the service provider, i.e. they can be replaced
by tokens issued by Gardener which will be recognized by the external entity
because trust was established beforehand. For example, machine controller
manager will no longer require static credentials to create virtual machines in
the cloud provider account of the Gardener user.

Cloud services, like AWS, Azure, Alicloud, GCP and others, support identity
federation with external to them identity providers via trust configuration

> using the OIDC protocol. This way the remotely running workloads can use JWTs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
using the OIDC protocol. This way, the remotely running workloads can use JWTs
```

their behalf to create resources. These credentials usually have long lifetime
(and are often non-expiring), they are reused in different scenarios by various
tools, occasionally granted with broader permissions, stored in different
locations. Such handling poses various security risks.

The static long-lived credentials can be replaced with short-lived auto-rotated
JWTs issued and used only by Gardener, never leaving the Gardener environment
except for representing Gardener workloads before an external entity,
eliminating the security burden to manage and store static credentials. Static
credentials can expire or get accidentally invalidated, which will cause
reconciliation flows to fail preventing delivery of updates, fixes, and
improvements. This risk is better to be managed in an automated way by Gardener
itself.

The JSON Web Tokens are ephemeral and not stored anywhere by the issuer, a
feature that Gardener can benefit of as well because it will not have to store
the credentials of Gardener users.

### Goals

- Manage shoot clusters without credentials provided by the user.
- Replace static credentials for gardener system components, e.g. DNS and backup
  controllers.

> - Rotate credentials regularly. Rotating the token signing keys, will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Rotate credentials regularly. Rotating the token signing keys will
```

  effectively invalidate all previously issued tokens.
- Offload Gardener users from the burden to store and manage static credentials
  for their accounts.

### Non-Goals

> - Register gardener as trusted identity in the shoot clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Register Gardener as trusted identity in the shoot clusters.
```

- The tokens to be usable for authentication with the Gardener API.

> - Compatibility with gardenctl integration with cloud provider CLIs.

Reviewer: If this is a non-goal, how do you envision this to work in the future? cc @petersutter

Author: One option that come into my mind is gardenctl to deploy a pod in the control plane and mount the secret with workload identity token.

Reviewer: Maybe you can add this as idea to the doc so that this doesn't get lost in the PR comments.

Reviewer 2: why wouldn't gardenctl not directly read the secret? 

Currently our endusers can use the [`provider-env`](https://github.com/gardener/gardenctl-v2/blob/master/docs/help/gardenctl_provider-env.md) command to configure their cloud provider CLIs. With this approach, endusers would not be able to do so as they do not have access to the control plane.

Why not directly create the `security.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1.TokenRequest` from the CLI?

Author: > Currently our endusers can use the [provider-env](https://github.com/gardener/gardenctl-v2/blob/master/docs/help/gardenctl_provider-env.md) command to configure their cloud provider CLIs

This is potentially privilege escalation, if a user have no access to the cloud provider account via other means, why does Gardener allow him/her to use the shoot infrastructure credentials to gain access? The same must be valid for gardener operators, they also should not use the shoot infrastructure credentials to gain access to the gardener user cloud account. And the GEP was written with this in mind in order to allow the possibility to disallow undesired access to the cloud account. 

> Maybe you can add this as idea to the doc so that this doesn't get lost in the PR comments.

While this is one possible option, it is not necessary to way to go, therefore no detailed implementation proposals should be incorporated in the GEP in my honest opinion.

Reviewer 2: then, regardless of the enduser access to the cloud account, how do you envision operators troubleshooting issues in the future without what you called "escalating privileges", where they previously used the shoot infra credentials

Reviewer 3: I agree that having this as a non-goal removes an important aspect of the discussion. Please consider removing it from the non-goals section and discuss how operations should work in future gardener releases if the gardener operator is no longer allowed to access the infrastructure resources of the shoot clusters.

Author: We discussed this topic in a meeting, the decision is that the GEP is not and will not propose to implement any restrictions who/what can request Workload Identity tokens, therefore `gardenctl` and any other tool/client are free to implement features utilising the Workload Identity API and managing the tokens for their needs. With regards to the permissions management, this GEP is concerned to ensure `gardenlet`s are allowed to request Workload Identity tokens.

- OIDC compliance - just as Kubernetes, Gardener goal is not to have full OIDC
  compliance, but to implement the bare minimum for OIDC compatible trust
  federation.

## Proposal

In short, Gardener API server will generate JWTs on request by gardenlet.
Gardenlet will ensure that the tokens can be consumed conveniently by the

> various components in the seed clusters, for example will write them in secrets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
various components in the seed clusters. For example, it will write them into secrets.
```

Service provider extensions will be responsible for making adjustments so that
the token is consumable by the service SDK. For shoot clusters, it would be
natural that the `cloudprovider` secret is reused as storage target for the
token.

Gardenlet will take care to refresh the token regularly and on time so that the
target storage always contains a valid token. As an example a token can be
refreshed when it reaches 80% of its lifetime. Of course it will all depend on
the validity duration of such tokens. This is why these parameters will be
configurable.

The OIDC metadata discovery documents will be served in such network segment,
e.g. public internet, so that service providers can be configured to trust
Gardener as an OIDC compatible token issuer.

### API Changes

> A new resource `WorkloadIdentity` in `security.gardener.cloud` API Group will be

Reviewer: Wouldn't the `authentication.gardener.cloud` group be a better fit?

Author: These JWTs/OIDC tokens are not expected to be used for authentication with the Gardener API, from this point of view I do not think `authentication.gardener.cloud` group, where are `AdminKubeconfig` and `ViewKubeconfig` resource, is the best choice for `WorkloadIdentity`. Let's collect some feedback here decide later.

Reviewer: The kubeconfigs resulting from `{Admin,Viewer}Kubeconfig` are similarly not used for authenticating with the Gardener API. Though, I also don't think that this is a requirement to be part of this API group. It makes sense to bundle resources that are related to authentication - this `WorkloadIdentity` clearly is.

implemented. It will specify different characteristics of the JWT, like the
value for the `aud` claim. The `WorkloadIdentity` resource will allow the token
duration to be set by Gardener users so they can use tokens with shorter or
longer validity compared to the default one. This duration will be ensured to be
between certain limits of minimal and maximal validity, in order to avoid

> frequent token renewals as well as tokens with too long validity.

Reviewer: Do we really need to support this? If we think about having lower/upper bounds anyways, why isn't it good enough to let the Gardener operators define a fixed validity for the tokens? What is the benefit of end-users overwriting this? For example, we don't do this for the short-lived `ServiceAccount` tokens for components running in shoot or seed - they are always valid for `12h` without anybody being able to configure it.

Author: Service account tokens do not leave the seed cluster, Workload Identity tokens will be send out to the external service provider. There might be compliance requirements about the validity of these tokens and global value might not be suitable for all cases, therefore it is exposed as option configurable by the users. Additionally, token duration period can influence the availability of the cluster, if a JWT cannot be exchanged for access token on time due to whatever reason (being Gardener or external service provider issue), the shoot effectively will be using invalid credentials, so all controllers depending on infra credentials will stop working (MCM, CSI, CCM, etc). Some users, based on their experience, might decide to trade a bit of security for highly availability.

Reviewer 4: >There might be compliance requirements about the validity of these tokens and global value might not be suitable for all cases, therefore it is exposed as option configurable by the users. 

There always will be a minimum validity defined (as already mentioned). The minimum validity will be the one that will serve properly all Gardener processes. I don't see a scenario where Gardener will benefit from a consumer defined longer validity.

Reviewer 4: >Additionally, token duration period can influence the availability of the cluster, if a JWT cannot be exchanged for access token on time due to whatever reason (being Gardener or external service provider issue)

Regarding addressing service provider issues and distinctions, token validity configuration could be per provider but again on service level controlled by the service operators not by the consumers.

Author: Gardener API and Gardenlet are provider independent components, hence they cannot bring any provider specific implementations. If the duration needs to vary for each service provider, then the provider extension admission controller needs to step in and adjust the duration, and these admission controllers are expected to make such adjustments on API objects. The `duration` field is set to be optional, which means that the default duration set by Gardener administrator will be used, unless the Gardener user decides to set own duration overwriting the default one. 

I think having such feature will not take much effort to be implemented and it should be relatively simple logic, so the chance something to go wrong is low. However, if you really insist the token duration configuration must not be exposed to Gardener users, then we must drop also the minimal and maximal values as they will serve no need. At the end, there will be a Gardener API server configuration setting globally the duration of each and every workload identity token. 

PS. If needed, later we can make the duration configurable by the users within certain range.

Reviewer 5: >  hence they cannot bring any provider specific implementations

My guess is that we will not need any provider specific implementations.

>  If the duration needs to vary for each service provider, then the provider extension admission controller needs to step in and adjust the duration, and these admission controllers are expected to make such adjustments on API objects.

Can't the extension/workload that requests the token through secret just specify the requested duration there?

I think that we can include the duration argument in the `TokenRequest` only. Then the GAPI will have min, max, default (default can equal min and thus not be provided as a parameter) and will ensure that all issued tokens are in the said range. If the requestor (gardenlet or other) requests a token outside the range then the token will be returned with the min/max configured validity depending on the requested validity. If the requestor does not specify a duration then the token can have minimum validity. WDYT?

Reviewer: Yes @dimityrmirchev, this is what I had in mind with my original comment.

> If the duration needs to vary for each service provider, then the provider extension admission controller needs to step in and adjust the duration, and these admission controllers are expected to make such adjustments on API objects.

Is this really the case? This makes everything a bit more complex and if we can avoid it, we probably should?

Author: With @rfranzke, @timuthy and @dimityrmirchev discussed this topic and we decided to:
- drop the `duration` field from the `WorkloadIdentity` resource, if needed - it can be added later 
- add optional `duration` field in the `TokenRequest` API to let various clients to overwrite the default duration (e.g. `gardenctl` should use as short as possible duration). 
- Gardener API server will have configuration for min, default and max durations, default will be used when no duration is set in the TokenRequest. 
- As of now Gardenlet will not set explicitly duration via the TokenRequest API, effectively will be using the default duration. If needed, such configuration can be added later.

Author: The discussed changes are implemented with 8a967c135081b

Similarly to `providerConfig` in other APIs, `WorkloadIdentity` resource will
feature a `config` field that will be of byte array type allowing service
provider specific configurations. Usually, the clients for services supporting

> identity federation needs additional information about the service account and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
identity federation need additional information about the service account and
```

the federated identity in order to successfully use the JWT. This information is

> known to the service account owners and they will provide it via this `config`

Reviewer: Then let's call it `providerConfig` to be in line with other APIs.

Author: Done with d2eda46ee9d1c0

write the value of the sub claim in the `status.sub` field to make it explicit,
otherwise Gardener users will have to deduce it themselves which could turn out
to be error prone.

```yaml
apiVersion: security.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
kind: WorkloadIdentity
metadata:
  name: banana-testing
  namespace: garden-local
  uid: 12b580fe-1f74-4195-852b-e1a74b03496a # generated by the API server.
spec:
  audiences: # Required field.
  - team-foo
  duration: 48h # Optional field, gardener will have default value of token duration if the field is unset.
  targetSystem: # Required field.
    type: aws # Required field.
    config: # Optional field of type []byte, extensions can make it mandatory via admission webhooks.
      apiVersion: aws.security.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
      kind: Config
      iamRoleARN: arn:aws:iam::112233445566:role/gardener-dev
status:
  sub: gardener.cloud:workloadidentity:garden-local:banana-testing:12b580fe-1f74-4195-852b-e1a74b03496a
```

JWTs will be available when the clients send `create` requests on the
`WorkloadIdentity/token` subresource. As the clients will be providing various
custom information that will be used for the generation of the JWT, yet another

> custom resource `TokenRequest` in the API group `security.gardener.cloud` will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
resource `TokenRequest` in the API group `security.gardener.cloud` will
```

be used. It is envisioned this resource to contain just metadata for the context
where the JWT is being used, e.g. shoot or backup entry identifier. Gardener API
server must verify the provided metadata and it can enhance the JWT with
additional information derived from the context, for example with information
for the project and the seed of the shoot cluster. Gardener API can also add
global information like a landscape identifier. As `WorkloadIdentity` already
specifies duration of the token, `TokenRequest` will not feature such field.
`TokenRequest` resources will never be persisted in the storage layer, the
generated token will be written in the `.status.token` field and returned to the
client as response. The expiration timestamp of the token will be also available
in the status via the `.status.expirationTimestamp` field.

```yaml
apiVersion: security.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
kind: TokenRequest

> metadata:
>   name: ""
>   namespace: ""

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Is this of any use?

Author: It should not be used, I was just following the pattern with the service account token request and (admin|viewer)kubeconfig.

Reviewer: OK, then let's remove it from the doc to prevent confusion/questions related to these fields.

spec:
  contextObject: # Optional field, various metadata about context of use of the token
    apiVersion: core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1
    kind: Shoot
    name: foo
    namespace: garden-local
    uid: 54d09554-6a68-4f46-a23a-e3592385d820
status:
  token: eyJhbGciOiJ....OkBBrVWA # The generated OIDC token
  expirationTimestamp: 2024-02-09T16:35:02Z
```

#### Shoot API

Shoot API will not undergo major changes, it will keep referring to
SecretBindings in the same namespace by their name, however the `SecretBinding`
API will be extended in the following way to enable usage of `WorkloadIdentity`
as infrastructure service credentials:

- `SecretBinding.secretRef` field will be made optional and mutable.
- new optional field `SecretBinding.workloadIdentityRef` will be introduced, it
  will refer to a `WorkloadIdentity` resource by its name and namespace. The
  value of the field will not be immutable and will allow existing shoots to

>   change the workloadidentity they are using to allow rotation by the Gardener

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  change the `WorkloadIdentity` they are using to allow rotation by the Gardener
```

  users.
- validation will ensure that either `secretRef` or `workloadIdentityRef` is
  set, but not both.
- on update of the `workloadIdentityRef`, a validation will ensure that both the

>   old and the new `WorkloadIdentity` are for the same cloud provider account.

Reviewer: How can this be validated from GAPI perspective?

Author: Account identifier is usually available in the `WorkloadIdentity.spec.targetSystem.config`, the old and the new `WorkloadIdentity` must have the same identifier.

Reviewer 6: Does this mean that users can never update `WorkloadIdentity.spec.targetSystem.config`, .e.g if they change their roles?

It's unclear to me why we need this validation. Today we only validate for the same cloud provider AFAIK.

Author: > Does this mean that users can never update WorkloadIdentity.spec.targetSystem.config, .e.g if they change their roles?

No, they can change it. If we take a look at the AWS example, the essential configuration is 
```yaml
iamRoleARN: arn:aws:iam::112233445566:role/gardener-dev
```

`112233445566` is the aws account id and it will be disallowed to be changed. However `gardener-dev` is the name of the AWS IAM Role resource and it can be changed at any time.
 
Until now no such validation was performed because the static credentials did not contain any account identifier and no requirement Gardener users to provide also the account ID was introduced because it was considered as breaking change. In the past, we have seen users changing the account and while some controllers managed to re-create relatively safely some of the resources (VPC, machines, NAT gateway, etc), others cannot (Persistent Volumes, Load Balancers). Also, all of the resources in the previously used account leaked.

With the workload identity feature sharing metadata about the cloud account becomes prerequisite and we can use it to close this gap now.

Reviewer 6: Thanks for the explanation. This brings me back to @rfranzke's question and how GAPI can validate anything specific in `WorkloadIdentity.spec.targetSystem.config` since this is usually a blackbox for `gardener/gardener`? Do the admission controllers of extensions need to take over here?

Author: Yes, by `a validation will ensure` I did not mean just static validations executed by the Gardener API, but also dynamic validations handled by extension webhooks. I will try to re-word and reflect this into the GEP.

Author: Done with 937fda954b3884e8f2a8c7e1795726942388e4b7

name for this resource, as it is no longer limited to referring only secrets, as
its name implies. In a future version of Gardener APIs, it could and would be
nice to be renamed to `CredentialsConfig`, `CredentialsBinding`,
`CredentialsSource` or something similar. This way it also leave open space for
other credentials implementations in the future.

Features associated with the SecretBinding like the quotas will be extended to
also cover clusters using WorkloadIdentity for authentication.

While the infrastructure credentials for the shoot cluster are the main driver
behind this GEP, various extensions can benefit of this feature as well. For
this purpose, a new optional field named `workloadIdentity` will be introduced
in `shoot.spec.extensions`, it will refer to workload identity by name assuming
the workloadIdentity resource is in the namespace of the shoot. The seed CRD
`extensions.extensions.gardener.cloud` will be also extended to reflect that the
extension is using workload identity letting extension controllers know when a
JWT or other kind of credentials are used.

Similar approach can be taken to provide alternative to

> `shoot.spec.dns.providers.secretName`, e.g. a new filed `workloadIdentity` will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`shoot.spec.dns.providers.secretName`, e.g. a new field `workloadIdentity` will
```

extended the `shoot.spec.dns.providers`.

```yaml
spec:
  extensions:
    - type: some-extension
      workloadIdentity:
        name: foo
  dns:
    providers:
    - type: some-dns-provider
      workloadIdentity:
        name: bar
```

### Gardener as OIDC Token Issuer

A new component, positively the metadata server from
[GEP-24](./24-shoot-oidc-issuer.md), will be used to publish the public OIDC
metadata discovery documents `/.well-known/openid-configuration` and `jwks_uri`.
This component will be only provided with access to the public keys or any other
public information, it will not hold or have access to any private information

> related to token generation and singing. To support keys rotation, it will serve

Reviewer: ```suggestion
related to token generation and signing. To support key rotation, it will serve
```

also the older set of public keys so that already issued but still valid and not
expired tokens can be used for identity federation with external services.

On key rotation, the new key pair might need to be published but not used to
sign the tokens, this is needed to ensure enough time for the external services
to discover the new public key. This rotation strategy could be useful for
external services that do not automatically rediscover the OIDC issuer metadata

> when the token is signed with still unknown to them key.

Reviewer: For how long?

Author: None of the major cloud providers has documented how often they are doing OIDC discovery, trying this out shows some rediscovering immediately, others needs 5-10 minutes. However, in the future other service can be integrated and they might need more time, so this behaviour will be configurable and the new keys should be published at least 1 day in advance.

Reviewer: OK, please add this to the doc for future reference.

The Kubernetes API server extended by the Gardener API server is already issuing

> JWTs for the kubernetes service accounts. To completely separate workload

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JWTs for the Kubernetes service accounts. To completely separate workload
```

> identity JWTs from service accounts JWTs, Gardener API will accept issuer URL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
identity JWTs from service accounts JWTs, Gardener API will accept an issuer URL
```

> parameter which value should not be the same as the issuer of the kubernetes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
parameter whose value should not be the same as the issuer of the Kubernetes
```

service accounts. The workload identity issuer url should not be among the
accepted issuers of the Kubernetes API server. Other configuration options for

> the Gardener API server will be the private key used to sign the tokens, the

Reviewer: Can you augment the document to also discuss the aspects of how this is envisioned to be integrated into `gardener-operator`? It deploys GAPI, so it will also be responsible for setting this private key. Will it be auto-generated and rotated via the typical credentials rotation operations (after human operators add respective operation annotation)?

Author: When gardener operator is used to manage the Gardener API server, of course it will be responsible to generate and rotate the keys. When the Gardener API server is deployed via external tool, it is also responsible for the keys management. 

Obviously, this key is very similar to the server TLS certificates of the Gardener API server, hence the same management strategy should be applied. 

Is it really necessary such low level implementation details to be part of the GEP?

Reviewer: I'm afraid I don't understand why this is a low-level implementation detail compared to other parts of this doc, but anyhow, I think it makes sense to describe how this affects `gardener-operator`. More concretely, it would be interesting to know which of the [credentials rotation operations](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/concepts/operator.md#credentials-rotation) will be responsible for rotation, or whether a new operation just for this key will be introduced. 1 or 2 sentences on the subject matter should be sufficient.

minimal, maximal and the default durations for each token. The private key also
should not be shared with the Kubernetes API server.

When Gardener API server is using own issuer and signing keys, the service
account token authenticator of the Kubernetes API server will not reject the
workload identity JWTs because:

- the issuer of the tokens is not accepted
- the tokens are not signed by trusted key

> - workload identity JWTs are not referring to any kubernetes service account

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- workload identity JWTs are not referring to any Kubernetes service account
```

- Gardener API will not serve the purpose of authentication or authorization
  webhook, it will also not implement any authentication or authorization based
  on the workload identity JWTs, it will just generate and sign them.

Gardener API server will use the global configurations, `WorkloadIdentity` and
`TokenRequest` specifications to issue JSON Web Tokens. Later, if a use case is
identified, it could feature custom claims in the `gardener.cloud` claim
namespace that contain additional information about the context of use of the
token, e.g. metadata about the shoot, seed, project, landscape, etc.

A sample payload of a token will look like:

```json
{
    "aud": [
        "service-foo-provider-bar"
    ],
    "exp": 1707315742,
    "iat": 1707312142,
    "nbf": 1707312142,
    "iss": "https://workload-identity.gardener-local.gardener.cloud",
    "sub": "gardener.cloud:workloadidentity:<workloadidentity-namespace>:<workloadidentity-name>:<workloadidentity-uid>",
    "gardener.cloud": {

>         "workloadidentity": {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        "workloadIdentity": {
```

? :)

Author: It is hard to find claim name examples using capital letters, but I have not found any specification rule disallowing it, hence I am fine.

            "name": "<workloadidentity-name>",
            "namespace": "<workloadidentity-namespace>",
            "uid": "<workloadidentity-uid>",
        },
        "shoot": {
            "name": "<shoot-name>",
            "namespace": "<shoot-namespace>",
            "uid": "<shoot-uid>",
        },
        "project": {
            "name": "<project-name>",
            "uid": "<project-uid>",
        },
        "seed": {
            "name": "<seed-name>",
            "uid": "<seed-uid>",
        },
        "landscape": {
            "id": "<gardener-landscape-id>",

>         },

Reviewer: What's this? Is this https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/07052b52a2d2eabb1a5991f1a4f3c92555abbb55/charts/gardener/controlplane/charts/runtime/templates/apiserver/deployment.yaml#L192? Perhaps it should be renamed accordingly?

Author: It should be https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/07052b52a2d2eabb1a5991f1a4f3c92555abbb55/pkg/apis/operator/v1alpha1/types.go#L395, no idea if this is the same.

Reviewer: Yes, it is. Maybe make this more clear in the doc - the term "landscape ID" is not an official term at all.

    }
}
```

### Distribution of Workload Identity Tokens

Gardenlet will request tokens as per the global configurations and renew them
regularly. It will be responsible to provide information for the specific usage
of the token, e.g. shoot name, namespace and UID, via the `TokenRequest` API.
Only the `gardenlet` will be authorized to create and refresh workload identity
tokens. Seed Authorizer will be extended to allow gardenlets to request workload
identity tokens only for `WorkloadIdentity` that they are responsible for.

As the tokens will usually have lifetime shorter than the period between two
reconciliations, it is essential that the token creation and management are
decoupled from the current control loops of gardenlet and implemented by a

> dedicated controller, also running in the gardenlet controller manager. Forced

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dedicated controller, also running as part of the gardenlet. Forced
```

> dedicated controller, also running in the gardenlet controller manager. Forced

Reviewer: Can you go a bit into detail? What will be the main purpose and tasks of this new controller? What will it do?

Author: The controller will be responsible to request workload identity tokens and write them in the target store.

`WorkloadIdentity`s is annotated with
`gardener.cloud/operation=renew-workload-identity-token`. The annotation is
deliberately not set on the `WorkloadIdentity` because single `WorkloadIdentity`
can be used by multiple shoots potentially running on different seeds, i.e.
multiple controllers would be responsible to react on the annotation which is
usually fine, but all of them would have to negotiate when the operation is
completed and the annotation to be removed.

To achieve the restriction only gardenlet to create or refresh tokens in the
seed cluster, but not any other controller running there, a new CRD
`WorkloadIdentityBinding` in the seed will be implemented. This CRD will refer
to the `WorkloadIdentity` in the Garden cluster that is source of the token, as
well as specify target store where the tokens to be written. Gardenlet will be
the only component having write access to this CRD, while extension controllers
and other components relying on workload identities should request no more than
read access. This `WorkloadIdentityBinding` CRD will be reconciled by a
dedicated controller named `workloadidentity-refresher` from Gardenlet

> controller manager responsible to request OIDC tokens and write them into the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
responsible to request OIDC tokens and write them into the
```

target store. The workload identity `spec.config` will be also written into the

> target store.

Reviewer: TBH, I don't understand this entire paragraph. Can you please explain it again/rephrase? Independently of the content, it is a bit strange that a CRD in cluster A references another resource in cluster B. I don't think this is a typical pattern.

- In order to restrict gardenlet to be the only instance able to create/refresh tokens, isn't it enough to NOT provide the respective privilege to extensions? 
- What is a "target store"?

Author: > isn't it enough to NOT provide the respective privilege to extensions?

In my drafts initially I was thinking to use secret with annotations and labels, but it looks like every controller in the seed have read/write access to all secrets in the seed, hence every controller would be able to request workload identity tokens, which we want to avoid. Therefore a dedicated resource is used, initially we wanted any access to this resource to be granted only to gardenlet, however extension controllers must be able to discover where the token is stored.

At the time this GEP is written, it is envisioned only secrets to be used as

> store targets. The token will be available on the data key `wiToken` in the

Reviewer: Why do we start with a cryptic name? Please name it explicitly.

   new token is requested from the Gardener API and written to the store
   together with the provider config.
1. The status of the `WorkloadIdentityBinding` is updated with the "issued at"
   and "expires at" timestamps of the token.
1. The `WorkloadIdentityBinding` is requeued for reconciliation again when the
   token will be suitable for renewal.

A sample `WorkloadIdentityBinding.extensions.gardener.cloud` resource will look like:

```yaml
apiVersion: extensions.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
kind: WorkloadIdentityBinding
metadata:
  name: cloudidentity
  namespace: shoot--local--foo
spec:
  type: aws
  config:
    apiVersion: aws.security.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
    kind: Config
    iamRoleARN: arn:aws:iam::112233445566:role/gardener-dev
  contextObject: # Optional field, various metadata about context of use of the token
    apiVersion: core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1
    kind: Shoot
    name: foo
    namespace: garden-local
    uid: 54d09554-6a68-4f46-a23a-e3592385d820
  workloadIdentity:
    name: banana-testing
    namespace: garden-local
  store:
    secretRef:
      name: cloudprovider
status:
  issuedAt: 2024-02-09T08:35:02Z
  expiresAt: 2024-02-09T16:35:02Z

> ```

Reviewer: Even after reading this, I still struggle to understand why we need this CRD. I would prefer to follow a similar approach as with the token requestor controller, see https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/example/resource-manager/30-secret-tokenrequestor.yaml for example.
- The "target store" seem to always be a secret (what else could it be?), and the `type/{provider}Config/contextObject/workloadIdentity` fields are "clear" since such a secret is created in a shoot namespace (i.e., can be derived from the shoot spec).
- The token-requestor write `serviceaccount.resources.gardener.cloud/token-renew-timestamp: "<...>"` annotation which is a good fit to replace the `status` in your proposal (if you insist, you can also write `{issued,expires}-at`, though, it's probably only of limited use compared to additional space it consumes.

Author: > The "target store" seem to always be a secret (what else could it be?),

A CSI driver, for example.

> and the type/{provider}Config/contextObject/workloadIdentity fields are "clear" since such a secret is created in a shoot namespace (i.e., can be derived from the shoot spec).

Please, have in mind that while the main purpose of the GEP is to provide alternative to the static infrastructure credentials of a shoot cluster, it is designed to be usable in other use cases, like DNS, backup, certificate, etc. controllers. 

Do you imply that these controllers must be watching the shoot or seed resource from the Gardener API now? 

Secret name is also not exposed as configuration in the shoot spec because shoot owners can easily misconfigure it and cause more harm than good. Also, no naming convention is proposed, because any change in the convention must be coordinated between all controllers which is tedious work. Changing the store type also would need to be coordinated. Therefore the store type and name are written in the resource and any controller can read it from there.

> I would prefer to follow a similar approach as with the token requestor controller, see https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/example/resource-manager/30-secret-tokenrequestor.yaml for example.

This is very subjective, during the recent years Gardener started relying too much on annotations basically for everything. And annotations are proven to not follow any API best practices, it is extremely hard to learn and understood the hundreds of annotations in what resources are applicable and what are their effect. This GEP certainly will not take the annotations path.

Reviewer: > A CSI driver, for example.

I don't think I have the full picture to follow this thought, but as the doc already mentions, it seems that `Secret`s will be the only "target store" for the foreseeable future. Do you have concrete plans w.r.t. CSI drivers, or is this just a theoretical idea that likely will never be implemented? Otherwise, please extend the doc with more details about this approach.

> This is very subjective, during the recent years Gardener started relying too much on annotations basically for everything.

Is this statement any less subjective?

> And annotations are proven to not follow any API best practices, it is extremely hard to learn and understood the hundreds of annotations in what resources are applicable and what are their effect.

Annotating and labelling existing resources is a best-practice in the Kubernetes community. Dozens of projects, including "first-class citizens" like cloud-controller-managers, but also well-adopted SIG projects like [external-dns](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/external-dns) make use of this approach. Reading a document to understand which labels/annotations have which effect isn't much different from reading a document to understand which spec fields have which effect.

My point is that a lot of this token handling for service providers is very similar to what we have already implemented w.r.t. token handling for API servers/`ServiceAccount`s. It makes a lot of sense to align the two approaches/implementations and not invent another approach just because it was implemented by other people.

To make it concrete for the examples in this doc, the `gardenlet` could create the following `Secret`:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: cloudprovider
  namespace: shoot--local--foo
  annotations:
    workloadidentity.authentication.gardener.cloud/name: <value of `.workloadIdentityRef.name` in the `SecretBinding` referenced `.spec.secretBinding` in the `Shoot`>
    workloadidentity.authentication.gardener.cloud/namespace: <value of `.workloadIdentityRef.namespace` in the `SecretBinding` referenced `.spec.secretBinding` in the `Shoot`>
  labels:
    authentication.gardener.cloud/purpose: workloadidentity-token-requestor
type: Opaque
```

Now, the controller in `gardenlet` responsible for requesting tokens can fetch the `Shoot` this namespace belongs to, create a `security.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1.TokenRequest`, and sync the token into the `.data.token`. There is no need to replicate the workload identity spec into the seed clusters.

For extensions, `gardenlet` could create similar `Secret`s named with the type of the extension:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: workloadidentity-some-extension
  namespace: shoot--local--foo
  annotations:
    workloadidentity.authentication.gardener.cloud/name: <value of `.spec.extensions[].workloadIdentity.name` for the extension of type `some-extension` in the `Shoot`
    workloadidentity.authentication.gardener.cloud/namespace: <namespace of the `Shoot`>
  labels:
    authentication.gardener.cloud/purpose: workloadidentity-token-requestor
type: Opaque
```

This makes the token handling much simpler and aligns it with the existing `token-requestor` controller, the indirection via the CRD is not needed.

> In my drafts initially I was thinking to use secret with annotations and labels, but it looks like every controller in the seed have read/write access to all secrets in the seed, hence every controller would be able to request workload identity tokens, which we want to avoid.

This "problem" exists already today with the `ServiceAccount` token secrets. All these controllers that have access to `Secret`s today will keep their access also after this GEP has been implemented. In your proposal, the token is eventually synced into a `Secret`, so again, all controllers will be able to fetch it. In this light, the fact that they cannot request new tokens doesn't help much since token generation is anyways limited to the workload identity referenced in the `Shoot` (hence, the token will be always valid for the same service provider, no matter whether newly requested or read from a "target store" secret).
If you still think is a problem, it should probably be addressed separately such that it also applies for the `ServiceAccount` token secrets (could perhaps be done via a validating webhook for `Secret`s in `gardener-resource-manager` that checks that such `Secret`s are only written by gardenlet or extensions).

Aligning the approach with the existing `token-requestor` also has the benefit that it might be reusable in the garden cluster when managed by `gardener-operator`, similar to how we have made the `ServiceAccount` token request approach reusable for the virtual garden cluster.
We are currently discussing how we can automate management of DNS records and the backup bucket for the garden cluster (currently, these entities are not covered by `gardener-operator` and must be managed with separate tooling). Details are not clear yet, but a CRD in the `extensions.gardener.cloud` API group probably invalidates the reusability option.

Reviewer 6: I think we should give @rfranzke's proposal a shot: it's streamlined and easy, no CRD detour. Do you see any real issues with it after seeing the example object?

Author: Addressed with 53ef0d243, please take a look.

> Aligning the approach with the existing `token-requestor` also has the benefit that it might be reusable in the garden cluster when managed by `gardener-operator`, similar to how we have made the `ServiceAccount` token request approach reusable for the virtual garden cluster.

I am not sure I can follow here, but it looks more natural the Kubernetes service account tokens of the runtime cluster to be used. It might not even work, because Workload Identity will be available only after the Gardener API server is up and running, but the DNS and the backup must be setup at that point of time, looks like some cyclic dependency would be introduced.

Gardenlet will take care also for the extensions using workload identities via
`shoot.spec.extensions.workloadIdentity`. For each such extension, it will
create a `WorkloadIdentityBinding.extensions.gardener.cloud` resource in the
control plane namespace named with the type of the extension. The name of the

> store might follow some established convention, but gardenlet have the freedom

Reviewer: ```suggestion
store might follow some established convention, but gardenlet has the freedom
```

> to generate a name, the requirement is the name to be stable across

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to generate a name. The only requirement is that the name remains stable across
```

reconciliations. Extension controllers can request read access for the
`WorkloadIdentityBinding` and read the name of the store themselves.

Similar approach will be considered also when workload identity is used for DNS
purposes, however no detailed proposal will be made as of now as usage of the
DNS secrets needs to be understand better, considering also internal and default
domains.

### Use cases

- Replaces static infrastructure credentials for shoot clusters running on AWS,
  Azure, Alibaba and GCP.
- Replaces static credentials used by backup controllers to interact with object
  storage service on AWS, Azure, Alibaba and GCP.
- Replaces static credentials used by dns controllers to interact with DNSaaS on
  AWS, Azure, Alibaba and GCP.
- Replaces static credentials used by certificate controllers to interact with
  CERTaaS providers.
- Others, for example Alertmanager receivers.
- Image pull secrets for private images.

## Alternatives

### SPIFFE/SPIRE

> It should be possible to run SPIRE server in the gardener landscape, presumably

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It should be possible to run SPIRE server in the Gardener landscape, presumably
```

in the runtime cluster, and SPIRE agents on each seed clusters.

> However, this would come with decent overhead

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, this would come with decent overhead:
```

- Bootstrapping the system and managing the credentials for different agents
  will need to be automated.
- The solution could easily lock-in to the SPIFFE/SPIRE as identity issuer and
  make it hard to change the implementation, if needed.

> - It is a 3rd party solution not so similar to kubernetes that needs to be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It is a 3rd party solution not so similar to Kubernetes that needs to be
```

  learned, operated and maintained.
- Limited flexibility to inject Gardener own data in the tokens. Eventually
  could be achieved with custom plugins.
- A standalone API endpoint that need to be properly operated, also all agents
  will need to be bootstrapped securely.
- SPIRE agents associate the identities with the nodes where the workload is
  running, but in Gardener we are more interested in the Seeds and the workload
  itself, not the nodes. With custom plugins it should be possible to make it

>   fit the gardener case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  fit the Gardener case.
```

- SPIRE server needs a database to store various information about the cluster,
  operating additional stateful component will require certain investment.
- Seems to be not so friendly when the server and agents are running in
  different clusters, especially on different clouds, as node attestation done
  by the server needs somehow to evaluate the nodes with the cloud providers.

>   With custom plugins it should be possible to make it fit gardener case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  With custom plugins it should be possible to make it fit Gardener case.
```

### Kubernetes Service Account Tokens From Garden Cluster

Using a dedicated resource instead of the `ServiceAccount` from k8s core API is
preferred because of several reasons:

- Requesting a workload identity token should be accessible only by workloads

>   running in the gardener environment, i.e. they should not be exported and used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  running in the Gardener environment, i.e. they should not be exported and used
```

  by other tools, services, application, etc. Gardener users are already granted
  with access to create tokens for `ServiceAccounts` in their project namespace
  and this cannot be restricted without introducing breaking changes.
- To ensure that workload identity tokens cannot be used for authentication with
  the Gardener API. `WorkloadIdentity` is designed to provide authentication
  with external services and not with Gardener API.

### Kubernetes Service Account Tokens From Seed Cluster

> A gardener landscape is highly dynamic and seed clusters are added and removed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Gardener landscape is highly dynamic and seed clusters are added and removed
```

  - [Kubernetes Service Account Tokens From Seed Cluster](#kubernetes-service-account-tokens-from-seed-cluster)

## Summary

Gardener issues and distributes JSON Web Tokens that can be used for
authentication with external services. Gardener also exposes metadata documents
in an OIDC compatible way, if needed, in the public internet. This allows
Gardener users to establish trust towards Gardener through their service
providers leveraging identity federation and parts of the OIDC protocol. By
employing the JWTs and the trust federation, static credentials are no longer
needed for authentication with the service provider, i.e. they can be replaced
by tokens issued by Gardener which will be recognized by the external entity
because trust was established beforehand. For example, machine controller
manager will no longer require static credentials to create virtual machines in
the cloud provider account of the Gardener user.

Cloud services, like AWS, Azure, Alicloud, GCP and others, support identity
federation with external to them identity providers via trust configuration

> using the OIDC protocol. This way, the remotely running workloads can use JWTs

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Cloud services, like AWS, Azure, Alicloud, GCP and others, support identity
federation with identity providers external to them via trust configuration
using the OIDC protocol. This way, the remotely running workloads can use JWTs
```

API will be extended in the following way to enable usage of `WorkloadIdentity`
as infrastructure service credentials:

- `SecretBinding.secretRef` field will be made optional and mutable.
- new optional field `SecretBinding.workloadIdentityRef` will be introduced, it
  will refer to a `WorkloadIdentity` resource by its name and namespace. The
  value of the field will not be immutable and will allow existing shoots to
  change the `WorkloadIdentity` they are using to allow rotation by the Gardener
  users.
- validation will ensure that either `secretRef` or `workloadIdentityRef` is
  set, but not both.
- on update of the `workloadIdentityRef`, a validation will ensure that both the
  old and the new `WorkloadIdentity` are for the same cloud provider account.

From user experience point of view, now `SecretBinding` might not be the best
name for this resource, as it is no longer limited to referring only secrets, as
its name implies. In a future version of Gardener APIs, it could and would be
nice to be renamed to `CredentialsConfig`, `CredentialsBinding`,
`CredentialsSource` or something similar. This way it also leave open space for

> other credentials implementations in the future.

Reviewer 3: Would it not rather make sense to do the change directly with this GEP? Indeed, `SecretBinding` is very opinionated in the direction of `Secret`s and does not hint at a general credential usage. Changing the API all at once would make it easier to comprehend from my perspective.

Author: It would have been easier if the API was still in alpha version, however now it will require long deprecation periods, intensive communication with users, changes in a lot of tools integrated with Gardener. It will unnecessary and artificially slow down development and rollout of workload identity, therefore it is better to be done separately when the API is redesigned, eventually in the future.

Reviewer 3: Why not add a separate option in the shoot API next to `.spec.secretBindingName`, e.g. `.spec.credentialBindingName`? It is fairly easy/straight-forward to validate that only one of the two is set. The new API could be introduced directly and the old API could still stay in place for a longer period of time. Eventually, we could decide to either remove `.spec.secretBindingName` or have essentially two different options how credentials could be provided.
WDYT?

Author: I was also thinking in this direction, but at end it looks like a bit much work and out of the scope of this GEP. And mostly the coordination with the different clients dealing with SecretBindings will imply unwanted artificial delays.

Reviewer 3: Maybe I did not understand you fully, but we need to anyway perform some changes as the credential handling is slightly different. If we go forward with the approach described in the GEP and store the credentials again in the `cloudprovider` secret in the control plane there are no changes on the credential consumer side required. However, this is regardless whether we "extend" `SecretBinding` or use `CredentialBinding` instead. Therefore, I do not get where artificial delays would come in.

For sure, the eventual deprecation/removal of the old API would take time, but this is true regardless if the change is done now or later.

I would not want the `SecretBinding` API to be extended in a hard to understand way if we just want to take shortcuts. Clean API design should be part of a GEP even if it means that the full implementation of the GEP will take more time.

Author: Done with 08fec71e60, please take a look.

parameter which value should not be the same as the issuer of the Kubernetes
service accounts. The workload identity issuer url should not be among the
accepted issuers of the Kubernetes API server. Other configuration options for
the Gardener API server will be the private key used to sign the tokens, the
minimal, maximal and the default durations for each token. The private key also
should not be shared with the Kubernetes API server. When `gardener-operator` is
used to manage the Garden cluster, it will be also responsible for the Workload
Identity token signing key rotation, a strategy similar to the one for the
Kubernetes Service Account token signing key should be used.

When Gardener API server is using own issuer and signing keys, the service
account token authenticator of the Kubernetes API server will not reject the
workload identity JWTs because:

- the issuer of the tokens is not accepted
- the tokens are not signed by trusted key
- workload identity JWTs are not referring to any Kubernetes service account
- Gardener API will not serve the purpose of authentication or authorization
  webhook, it will also not implement any authentication or authorization based

>   on the workload identity JWTs, it will just generate and sign them.

Reviewer 3: Is this double negation really necessary and correct? Both, the sentence before the `:` and the bullet points have negation. Can you please check and revise to make it more readable?

Author: Nice catch, should be fixed now. ptal.

Reviewer 3: Now, it makes more sense :-) .

tokens. Seed Authorizer will be extended to allow gardenlets to request workload
identity tokens only for `WorkloadIdentity` that they are responsible for.

As the tokens will usually have lifetime shorter than the period between two
reconciliations, it is essential that the token creation and management are
decoupled from the current control loops of gardenlet and implemented by a
dedicated controller, also running as part of the gardenlet. Forced renewal of
the tokens will be performed when the resource referring `WorkloadIdentity`s is
annotated with `gardener.cloud/operation=renew-workload-identity-token`. The
annotation is deliberately not set on the `WorkloadIdentity` because single
`WorkloadIdentity` can be used by multiple shoots potentially running on
different seeds, i.e. multiple controllers would be responsible to react on the
annotation which is usually fine, but all of them would have to negotiate when
the operation is completed and the annotation to be removed.

To achieve the restriction only gardenlet to create or refresh tokens in the
seed cluster, but not any other controller running there, a new CRD

> `WorkloadIdentityBinding` in the seed will be implemented. This CRD will refer

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To achieve the restriction that only `gardenlet` creates or refreshes tokens in the
seed cluster, but not any other controller running there, a new CRD
`WorkloadIdentityBinding` in the seed will be implemented. This CRD will refer
```

   seed based on the configuration of the `WorkloadIdentity` and the shoot spec.
   The name of the `WorkloadIdentityBinding` resource will be `cloudidentity`
   while the name of the target store secret `cloudprovider`.
1. `workloadidentity-refresher` receives event for `WorkloadIdentityBinding`
   resource. It parses the token from the target store and if the token is still
   valid, it just applies the provider config to the target store, otherwise a
   new token is requested from the Gardener API and written to the store
   together with the provider config.
1. The status of the `WorkloadIdentityBinding` is updated with the "issued at"
   and "expires at" timestamps of the token.
1. The `WorkloadIdentityBinding` is requeued for reconciliation again when the
   token will be suitable for renewal.

A sample `WorkloadIdentityBinding.extensions.gardener.cloud` resource will look like:

```yaml
apiVersion: extensions.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
kind: WorkloadIdentityBinding
metadata:
  name: cloudidentity
  namespace: shoot--local--foo
spec:
  type: aws
  config:
    apiVersion: aws.authentication.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
    kind: Config

>     iamRoleARN: arn:aws:iam::112233445566:role/gardener-dev

Reviewer 6: By which component and how will this provider specific content be processed?

Author: `gardener-extension-validator-(aws|gcp|alicloud|azure|...)` will admit this config. They will parse and validate the inlined `Config` resource. Each extension will implement own semantic validation of the resource as it differs for each extension.

Reviewer 6: I assume the the extensions need to do something else to weave in the information from the `Config`. Could you elaborate on how this implementation is planned in the text?

I think it would be helpful to have some details about the entire procedure in the text and ideally a sequence diagram (streamlined to the essential steps) to understand the flow e2e, from `WorkloadIdentity` creation to credentials usage by the provider extension during shoot reconcile.

Author: I will enhance the flow description to cover the end-to-end usage of the feature, it will consider how the token will be used by actual component, e.g. cloud-controller-manager.

Author: Done with 08074aae

    apiVersion: core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1
    kind: Shoot
    name: foo
    namespace: garden-local
    uid: 54d09554-6a68-4f46-a23a-e3592385d820
  workloadIdentity:
    name: banana-testing
    namespace: garden-local
  store:
    secretRef:
      name: cloudprovider
status:
  issuedAt: 2024-02-09T08:35:02Z
  expiresAt: 2024-02-09T16:35:02Z
```

Gardenlet will take care also for the extensions using workload identities via
`shoot.spec.extensions.workloadIdentity`. For each such extension, it will
create a `WorkloadIdentityBinding.extensions.gardener.cloud` resource in the
control plane namespace named with the type of the extension. The name of the
store might follow some established convention, but gardenlet has the freedom to
generate a name. The only requirement is that the name remains stable across
reconciliations. Extension controllers can request read access for the
`WorkloadIdentityBinding` and read the name of the store themselves.

Similar approach will be considered also when workload identity is used for DNS
purposes, however no detailed proposal will be made as of now as usage of the
DNS secrets needs to be understand better, considering also internal and default

> domains.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Similar approach will be considered also when workload identity is used for DNS
purposes, however no detailed proposal will be made as of now as usage of the
DNS secrets needs to be understood better, considering also internal and default
domains.
```

The value of the `sub` claim of the OIDC token will be computed by Gardener, it
will have the following format
`gardener.cloud:workloadidentity:<workloadidentity-namespace-name>:<workloadidentity-name>:<workloadidentity-uuid>`.
A validation must ensure that the `WorkloadIdentity` name and namespace name do
not exceed certain limit. This restrictions is required as per the OIDC
[Specification](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#IDToken)
the `sub` claim cannot exceed 255 ASCII chars length. Gardener API server will
write the value of the sub claim in the `status.sub` field to make it explicit,
otherwise Gardener users will have to deduce it themselves which could turn out
to be error prone.

```yaml
apiVersion: authentication.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
kind: WorkloadIdentity
metadata:
  name: banana-testing
  namespace: garden-local
  uid: 12b580fe-1f74-4195-852b-e1a74b03496a # generated by the API server.
spec:
  audiences: # Required field.
  - team-foo
  duration: 48h # Optional field, gardener will have default value of token duration if the field is unset.
  targetSystem: # Required field.
    type: aws # Required field.

>     providerConfig: # Optional field of type []byte, extensions can make it mandatory via admission webhooks.

Reviewer: Nit: It should be of type`*runtime.RawExtension`, but that's a minor detail.

      apiVersion: aws.authentication.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
      kind: Config
      iamRoleARN: arn:aws:iam::112233445566:role/gardener-dev
status:
  sub: gardener.cloud:workloadidentity:garden-local:banana-testing:12b580fe-1f74-4195-852b-e1a74b03496a
```

JWTs will be available when the clients send `create` requests on the
`WorkloadIdentity/token` subresource. As the clients will be providing various
custom information that will be used for the generation of the JWT, yet another
resource `TokenRequest` in the API group `authentication.gardener.cloud` will be
used, similar to `TokenRequest` from `authentication.k8s.io/v1` API. It is
envisioned this resource to contain just metadata for the context where the JWT
is being used, e.g. shoot or backup entry identifier. Gardener API server must
verify the provided metadata and it can enhance the JWT with additional
information derived from the context, for example with information for the
project and the seed of the shoot cluster. Gardener API can also add global
information like a garden cluster identity. As `WorkloadIdentity` already

> specifies duration of the token, `TokenRequest` will not feature such field.

Reviewer: Instead of having this on `WorkloadIdentity`, why not moving the duration to the `TokenRequest` API, similar to how its done for `ServiceAccount`s? You also don't specify the token duration globally on `ServiceAccount` level.

Reviewer 4: Considering the fact that these tokens will be used by Gardener service processes, there is no need to provide any configuration option to the Gardener service consumers (project owners/admins) for defining the validity of these tokens on WorkloadIdentity level. I believe that the validity of these tokens must be defined centrally for the service by the Gardener service operators in a way that this validity will serve properly all Gardener service processes that will use them and considering common security best practices.

Author: The reasons for this design were shared in https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/9260#discussion_r1513142814, should I include this also in the GEP?

  the namespace is unset, the namespace of the `CredentialsBinding` is
  will be used.
- `quotas` and `provider` fields have the semantic as their respective
  counterparts in the `SecretBinding` API. `providers` will be made mandatory
  field also via the API specification.
- Static validation will ensure that exactly one of `secretRef` or
  `workloadIdentityRef` fields is set, but not both or none of them.
- On update of the `workloadIdentityRef`, extension admission controller should
  ensure that both the old and the new `WorkloadIdentity` are for the same cloud
  provider account, if such validation is possible for the given extension.

```yaml
apiVersion: authentication.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
kind: CredentialsBinding
metadata:
  name: my-credentials
  namespace: garden-local
provider:
  type: aws # {aws,azure,gcp,...}
secretRef: # unlike SecretBindings, this field will be optional and mutable
  name: static
  # namespace: "...", allow reference across namespaces
workloadIdentityRef:
  name: banana-testing
  # namespace: "...", allow reference across namespaces
quotas: []
# - name: quota-1
# # namespace: garden-quoatas
```

> Shoot API will be extended with new field `.spec.credentialsBindingName` which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Shoot API will be extended with new field `.spec.credentialsBindingName` whose
```

Author: I am not a native speaker but I have the gut feeling `whose` is used with persons, and `which` with things, but I will apply the proposed change.

`extensions.extensions.gardener.cloud` will be also extended to reflect that the
extension is using workload identity letting extension controllers know when a
JWT or other kind of credentials are used.

Similar approach can be taken to provide alternative to
`shoot.spec.dns.providers.secretName`, e.g. a new field `workloadIdentity` will
extended the `shoot.spec.dns.providers`.

```yaml
spec:
  extensions:
    - type: some-extension
      workloadIdentity:
        name: foo
  dns:
    providers:
    - type: some-dns-provider
      workloadIdentity:
        name: bar
```

#### Seed API Related Changes

Wherever the Seed API is referring to secrets, it will be extended to refer to
workload identities, as of now these are the fields `spec.backup.` and
`spec.dns.provider` and they will have new field `workloadidentityRef` holding
the name and the namespace of a workload identity resource. The respective
`secretRef` fields will be made optional and validation will ensure only one of
`secretRef` and `workloadIdentityRef` is used at a time.

```yaml
apiVersion: core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1
kind: Seed
metadata:
  name: seed
spec:
  backup:

>     workloadidentityRef:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    workloadIdentityRef:
```

same above and below

also the older set of public keys so that already issued but still valid and not
expired tokens can be used for identity federation with external services.

On key rotation, the new key pair might need to be published but not used to
sign the tokens, this is needed to ensure enough time for the external services
to discover the new public key. This rotation strategy could be useful for
external services that do not automatically rediscover the OIDC issuer metadata
when the token is signed with still unknown to them key. The major
infrastructure providers do not document publicly how often they are running
OIDC rediscovery, but a hands-on experience shows that some are doing it
immediately, while others need several minutes. As workload identity is not
limited only to the major infrastructure providers, therefore the duration of
this period will be configurable and it would be recommended to be at least one
day long.

The Kubernetes API server extended by the Gardener API server is already issuing
JWTs for the Kubernetes service accounts. To completely separate workload
identity JWTs from service accounts JWTs, Gardener API will accept an issuer URL

> parameter which value should not be the same as the issuer of the Kubernetes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
parameter whose value should not be the same as the issuer of the Kubernetes
```

`token` data key, while the provider config will use the `config` data key. The
name and namespace of the used `WorkloadIdentity` will be stored in the
annotations `workloadidentity.authentication.gardener.cloud/name` and
`workloadidentity.authentication.gardener.cloud/namespace` respectively. The
annotation `workloadidentity.authentication.gardener.cloud/context-object`, if
present, will hold reference to the object using the workload identity, the
value will be JSON document and have the format
`{"apiVersion":"...","kind":"...","name":"...","namespace":"...","uid":"..."}`.
It will be the source for the `spec.contextObject` field of the `TokenRequest`.
To let the controller(s) easily select or distinguish these secrets, they will
be labeled with
`authentication.gardener.cloud/purpose: workload-identity-token-requestor`. The
secrets will be also labeled with
`workloadidentity.authentication.gardener.cloud/provider=<WorkloadIdentity.spec.targetSystem.type>`
so that the extensions can easily select them and make adjustments via admission
webhooks, e.g. transform the service provider config and the token into

> canonical form usable by the respective service provider SDK.

Reviewer: Could you perhaps just write down an example YAML `Secret` similar to the one from the comments above? It is way easier to read this compared to this text paragraph.

Author: Done with 76f3c7d17

The secret `cloudprovider` that now holds the static credentials will be reused
to store the token and the provider config when the shoot is using workload
identity as infrastructure credentials. For each extension using workload
identity, the secret will be named
`workloadidentity-extension-<extension-type>`, and for dns providers
`workloadidentity-dns-<dns-provider-type>`.

The reconciliation flow for a component using workload identity tokens will look

> like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
like this:
```
